Skeleton 2-1/2D Electromagnetic Gridless OpenMP Particle-in-Cell (PIC)
codes
by Viktor K. Decyk
copyright 1999-2019, regents of the university of california

This program contains sample codes for illustrating the basic structure
of a 2-1/2D Electromagnetic Gridless OpenMP Particle-in-Cell (PIC) code,
in Fortran with C wrappers.  The codes have no diagnosics except for
initial and final energies.  Their primary purpose is to provide example
codes for physical science students learning about OpenMP PIC codes.
They are also intended as benchmark reference codes to aid in developing
new codes and in evaluating new computer architectures.  A serial
version of this code with the same structure (bpic2gl) also exists, and
can be compared to this code in order to understand the parallel
algorithms.

Gridless PIC codes are based on an exact solution of many interacting
particles, based on a fourier series.  The only approximations are a
finite time step and a truncation of the fourier series, as well as
round off errors.  The first gridless code was developed by John Dawson
in the 1960s for electrostatic systems, and is described in 
John M. Dawson, "The Electrostatic Sheet Model for a Plasma and its
Modification to Finite-Size Particles," Methods in Computational
Physics, volume 9, B. Alder, S. Fernback, and M. Rotenburg, Ed.
[Academic Press, New York, 1970, p. 1.

Traditional PIC codes are widely used in plasma physics.  They model
plasmas as particles which interact self-consistently via the
electromagnetic fields they themselves produce.  PIC codes generally
have three important procedures in the main iteration loop.  The first
is the deposit, where some particle quantity, such as a charge, is
accumulated on a grid via interpolation to produce a source density.
The gridless code calculates the fourier co-efficients directly without
using a grid or FFTs.  The second important procedure is the field
solver, which solves Maxwell’s equation or a subset to obtain the
electric and/or magnetic fields from the source densities.  The solver
in the gridless code is the same as a spectral solver in a traditional
PIC code, except that the number of fourier modes used can vary and the
fields remain in fourier space.  In a traditional PIC code, once the
fields are obtained in real space, the particle forces are found by
interpolation from the grid, and the particle co-ordinates are updated,
using Newton’s second law and the Lorentz force.  The gridless code
calculates the electric field at the particle's location directly from
the fourier series without use of a grid or interpolation.  Updating the
particle co-ordinates is the same as in a traditional PIC code.  The
particle processing parts dominate over the field solving parts in a
typical PIC application.  The gridless code is MUCH slower than a
traditional code, scaling as the number of particles TIMES the number
of fourier modes retained.  Gridless codes are much more accurate and do
not suffer from aliasing errors.  They are especially useful when
unusual errors are occurring in a traditional PIC code, or for very
precise calculations.

More details about traditional PIC codes can be found in the texts by
C. K. Birdsall and A. B. Langdon, Plasma Physics via Computer
Simulation, 1985, R. W. Hockney and J. W. Eastwood, Computer Simulation
Using Particles, 1981, and John M. Dawson, "Particle simulation of
plasmas", Rev. Mod. Phys. 55, 403 (1983).  Details about the
mathematical equations used in the gridless code and units used in this
code is given in the companion article, "Description of Electromagnetic
Spectral Code from the UPIC Framework" by Viktor K. Decyk, UCLA, in the
file EMModelsGL.pdf.

Details abut OpenMP can be found in the book by Rohit Chandra, Leonardo
Dagum, Dave Kohr, Dror Maydan, Jeff McDonald, and Ramesh Menon, Parallel
Programming in OpenMP, Morgan Kaufmann, 2001.

No warranty for proper operation of this software is given or implied.
Software or information may be copied, distributed, and used at own
risk; it may not be distributed without this notice included verbatim
with each file.  If use of these codes results in a publication, an
acknowledgement is requested.

The code here uses the complete electromagnetic interaction, obtained by
solving Maxwell's equation.  The boundary conditions are periodic, only
electron species are included.

For parallelization, the push procedures are parallelized over particles
and the deposit procedures are parallelized over fourier modes

Particles are initialized with a uniform distribution in space and a
gaussian distribution in velocity space.  This describes a plasma in
thermal equilibrium.  The inner loop contains a current and charge
deposit, a transverse current procedure, Maxwell and Poisson solvers,
and a particle push procedure.  The final energy and timings are
printed.  A sample output file for the default input parameters is
included in the file output.

In more detail, the inner loop of the code contains the following
procedures in Fortran (C):

Deposit section:
   MRDJPOST2GL (cmrdjpost2gl): relativistic current deposit, and update
                               position: x(t+dt/2)->x(t+dt)
   MDJPOST2GL (cmdjpost2gl): deposit current density, and update
                             position: x(t+dt/2)->x(t+dt)
   MDPOST2GL (cmdpost2gl): deposit charge density

Field solve section:
   CUPERP2GL (ccuperp2gl): take transverse part of current
   IBPOIS23GL (cibpois23gl): calculate initial magnetic field in fourier
                             space
   EPOIS23GL (cepois23gl): calculate initial transverse electric field 
                           in fourier space
   AMAXWEL2GL (camaxwel2gl): update transverse electromagnetic fields in
                             fourier space
   POIS23GL (cpois23gl): calculate smoothed longitudinal electric field
                         in fourier space.
   EMFIELD2GL (cemfield2gl): add smoothed longitudinal and transverse
                             electric fields
   EMFIELD2GL (cemfield2gl): copy smoothed magnetic field

Particle Push section:
   MARBPUSH23GL (cmarbpush23gl): update relativistic particle
                                 co-ordinates with smoothed electric and
                                 magnetic fields:
                                 x(t)->x(t+dt/2); v(t-dt/2)->v(t+dt/2)
   MABPUSH23GL (cmabpush23gl): update particle co-ordinates with
                               smoothed electric and magnetic fields:
                               x(t)->x(t+dt/2); v(t-dt/2)->v(t+dt/2)

The inputs to the code are the grid parameters indx, indy, the particle
number parameters npx, npy, the time parameters tend, dt, the velocity
parameters vtx, vty, vtz, vx0, vy0, vz0, the inverse speed of light ci,
the flag relativity, and the fourier mode parameters nxhm, nyhm.

In more detail:
indx = exponent which determines length in x direction, nx=2**indx.
indy = exponent which determines length in y direction, ny=2**indy.
   These ensure the system lengths are a power of 2.
npx = number of electrons distributed in x direction.
npy = number of electrons distributed in y direction.
   The total number of particles in the simulation is npx*npy.
tend = time at end of simulation, in units of plasma frequency.
dt = time interval between successive calculations.
   The number of time steps the code runs is given by tend/dt.
   dt should be less than .45*ci for the electromagnetic code.
vtx/vty/vtz = thermal velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction.
   a typical value is 1.0.
vx0/vy0/vz0 = drift velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction.
ci = reciprocal of velocity of light
relativity = (no,yes) = (0,1) = relativity is used
nxhm/nyhm = number of fourier modes kept in x/y direction.

The major program files contained here include:
mbpic2gl.f90    Fortran90 main program 
mbpic2gl.c      C main program
mbpush2gl.f     Fortran77 procedure library
mbpush2gl_h.f90 Fortran90 procedure interface (header) library
mbpush2gl_f.c   C wrapper functions for calling Fortran routines in C
mbpush2gl.h     C procedure header library
dtimer.c        C timer function, used by both C and Fortran

Files with the suffix .f90 adhere to the Fortran 90 standard, files with
the suffix .f adhere to the Fortran77 standard, files with the suffix .c
and .h adhere to the C99 standard.

The makefile is setup to use gcc and gfortran with Linux.  A version for
Mac OS X is also in the Makefile, but is commented out.  

Two executables can be created, fmbpic2gl for Fortran and cmbpic2gl_f
for C.

To compile program, execute:

Make program_name

where program_name is either: fmbpic2gl or cmbpic2gl_f, or execute:

make

to create both programs.

To execute, type the name of the executable:

./program_name

where program_name is either fmbpic2gl or cmbpic2gl_f.  By default,
OpenMP will use the maximum number of processors it can find.  If the
userwants to control the number of threads, you can set a parameter nvp
in the main program. In addition, the environment variable
OMP_NUM_THREADS may need to be set to the maximum number of threads
expected.

The file output contains the results produced for the default parameters.

The codes are compiled for double precision by default, but the Fortran
code can be compiled to run in single precision by changing the Makefile
(typically by removing the compiler options flag -r8).

The libraries omplib_f.c and mbpush2gl_f.c contains wrapper functions to
allow the Fortran libraries to be called from C.
